as the second world war ended and masses
of servicemen returned home to America
having spent almost all of their time
away exclusively with other men there
seemed to be an opening of the minds of
the American populace when it came to
homosexuality not that it was an
acceptable alternative to
heterosexuality now but that it wasn't
the worst thing in the world usually
under the caveat that it would be
something a man would grow out of
how Italian but politicians who did not
serve their country in Europe or the
South Pacific did not see this new
momentary mindset as a good thing
instead they saw it as a corrupting
influence on America's men just as bad
if not worse than the ghostly specter of
Communism they feared would make its way
to the United States after American boys
spent so much time with Russians over in
Europe and so began the Red Scare in
Washington DC as politicians led a
crusade against actual and perceived
Communists working within the Beltway
and it didn't take long for them to
broaden their scope to include actual
and perceived homosexuals as well with
almost 5 000 gay people having lost
their jobs in Washington by the end of
the scare the lavender scare became a
Witch Hunt for Boogeyman just as
terrifying as the Communists and as
Washington took aim at suspected
Communists in Hollywood suspected
homosexuals in Hollywood were added to
the growing Blacklist but before we
explore the government-sanctioned
Manhunt against gays and lesbians in the
1950s
let's hear a word from our sponsor this
video is brought to you by hellofresh
making these videos I spend a lot of
time at my computer so it can become
very tempting to order in every night
but with hellofresh's easy to prepare
meals that even meet my dietary needs I
not only get to save money but get to
eat a much healthier diet while I do it
hellofresh's boxes of fresh food are
delivered weekly and you can even
specify how much you'll need based on
how many people you're feeding these
boxes contain recipe cards that tell you
how to cook step by step making it easy
for even people like me to cook as well
as the fresh high quality ingredients
that are pre-measured in exact amounts
to avoid food waste you can choose your
meals up to a month in advance and have
a wide selection of choices to choose
from including low calorie low carb
family style and vegetarian they even
have Gourmet options that feature
premium ingredients like beef tenderloin
and lobster tail to get started with
hellofresh today you can go to
hellofresh.com and sign up with my code
hello James to receive 20 free meals
plus free shipping on your first box
that's
h-e-l-l-o-j-a-m-e-s for 20 free meals
and free shipping on your first order or
you can just click the link in the
description start eating healthier today
with hellofresh
foreign
[Music]
in the early 20th century the United
States experienced a period of political
persecution and anxiety known as the Red
Scare there were two different eras in
American history that are collectively
known as the Red Scare both of which
were marked by widespread anxiety over
communism and other leftist ideas the
first Red Scare happened in the wake of
World War One and is rarely spoken about
and the second occurred in the midst of
the Cold War in the late 1940s and early
1950s to a considerable extent the 1917
Bolshevik Revolution in Russia was to
blame for the onset of the first Red
Scare it's no secret that many Americans
especially those in positions of
authority were worried about the
emergence of the Soviet Union and the
expansion of Communism in Europe in
response to this perceived threat the
American government enacted a set of
laws intended to limit the freedoms of
those who were either Communists or
sympathizers of the Communist cause the
Sedition Act of 1918 was one of the most
notorious pieces of legislation enacted
at the time because it made it a crime
to criticize is the government anyone
suspected of being a communist or
Anarchist was subject to prosecution
under these statutes regardless of
whether or not they had committed any
real crimes the American Protective
League was one of the several private
groups formed during the first Red Scare
with the authority to investigate and
report on suspected's verses during the
height of the red scared the American
Legion spearheaded a drive to identify
and punish suspected traitors after
World War II tensions between the United
States and the Soviet Union grew once
again sparking the second Red Scare
during this time communism was again
considered a major danger to American
democracy and its way of life the
inquiry undertaken by Senator Joseph
McCarthy known as the McCarthy hearings
was one of the most important events of
the second Red Scare McCarthy claimed to
have a list of people who were either
Communist party members or sympathizers
and he used his position in government
to initiate a series of Investigations
and interrogations to flush them out
dramatic confrontations and high profile
charges typified the McCarthy hearings
which had far-reaching effects on
American culture many individuals were
punished for their suspected communist
links even though there was no proof to
back up the claims Witnesses were
questioned under duress throughout the
trials to get them to identify other
Communists who were under suspicion even
if they were judged not to be communist
supporters many people were blacklisted
and lost their employment as a
consequence of the proceedings because
of McCarthy and his associates harsh
methods and disregard for due process
the hearings became notorious
but the hearings came to an end in 1954
when McCarthy was censured by the senate
for his conduct during the
investigations marking the beginning of
the end of McCarthy's political career
the hearings are now widely viewed as a
dark chapter in American history in 1950
many politicians journalists and
citizens thought that homosexuals
actually posed more of a threat to
National Security than Communists one
columnist argued there is no record of
comparable corruption in American
history in a national radio broadcast
noted liberal Elmer Davis said it looks
as if the enemies of the state
department and of the administration
generally have gotten hold of a more
profitable issue than communism Senator
Kenneth weary asked his Senate
colleagues can you think of a person who
would be more dangerous to the United
States than a pervert and
multiple of President Harry Truman's top
advisors wrote him memos stating the
country is more concerned about the
charges of homosexuals in government
than about Communists in the UK it was
just about social Purity yet in America
the existence of gay men specifically
was somehow a matter of life and death
historians of the McCarthy period have
paid surprisingly little attention to
the lavender scare despite the
widespread worry and even Panic it
caused at the time the significance of
Party politics and foreign policy in the
emergence of the National Security State
is emphasized by political historians of
McCarthyism anti-communism and the
establishment of the National Security
State while the role of moral and
cultural concerns is downplayed anytime
the lavender scare is discussed it is as
an afterthought of the Red Scare that is
so obvious that it doesn't ever need
explanation the overlapping worries of
Communism in homosexual quality have
been largely ignored in even the most
recent examinations of McCarthyism both
the defenses from the right and
criticisms from the left many people who
supported McCarthy back in the 1950s
considered the systemic expulsion of
gays from the state department and other
government positions to be his most
lasting achievement senator Joseph
McCarthy alleged in February of 1950
that there were 205 Communists working
in the state department that's a month
under Secretary of State John Purifoy
said that the state department had
permitted 91 homosexuals to retire after
this some said the president Harry
Truman's government was insufficiently
concerned about the threat posed by
homosexuals the Senate started looking
into homosexuals working for the
government in June of 1950. although the
findings weren't made public until
December throughout that time there was
a sharp rise in the number of government
employees let go because of homophobic
harassment or discrimination when asked
about quote sexual perverts who have
infiltrated our government in recent
years Republican National chairman guy
George gabrielson claimed that they were
perhaps as dangerous as the actual
Communists however being homosexual
wasn't the only reason they were in
danger homosexuals were observed as
security threats because they were
believed to be more vulnerable to
Blackmail as top counsel of his
Congressional subcommittee McCarthy
employed Roy Cohn who himself was
homosexual and died of AIDS decades
later because of his attempts to protect
his reputation he insisted that his
doctor treat him for liver cancer so at
the same time that his immune system was
dying he was undergoing Cancer
Treatments that destroyed what was left
of his white blood cells at the same
time he also pulled what strings he
could to get on the experimental HIV
medication that was still undergoing
medical trials AZT which
destroyed his liver someday we will
progress as a community to the point
where the only remaining Legacy of Roy
Cohn is as the villain of Tony kushner's
iconic stage play angels in America
but we're not quite there yet because
Cohn and McCarthy with the help of FBI
director J Edgar Hoover who is also
believed to have been gay were
responsible for the dismissal of
thousands of gay government employees
and the intimidation of many of their
political opponents into Silence by
spreading false allegations about their
sexual orientation the state department
revealed that it had dismissed 425
workers due to charges of homosexuality
in the closing months of the Truman
Administration in 1953. McCarthy's
anti-communist campaign often fused the
second Red Scare with the lavender scare
by using allegations of homosexuality as
a smear tactic reporters were once
subjected to the following statement if
you want to be against McCarthy Boys
you've got to either be a communist or a
when proof of communist
activity was absent McCarthy allegedly
used guilt by association by equating
communism and homosexuality with mental
instability the general public and even
politicians had a common view that gays
and Communists were both morally weak or
psychologically Disturbed as well as
Godless and destructive to traditional
families for instance McCarthy openly
discussed two individuals case 14 and
case 62 on the senate floor as
Communists who posed unsafe risks due to
their homosexuality he said that a
high-ranking intelligence officer had
informed him that every active communist
is Twisted mentally or physically
implying that those with the peculiar
mental twists of homosexuality were more
susceptible to recruitment by Communists
many of the male workers at the state
department started to feel uncomfortable
even being there because of the
Department's new association with
homosexuality they were quite adamant
about not being seen in pairs and they
often introduced themselves with words
emphasizing their straightness hi I'm so
and so I work for the state department
and I'm married and I have three
children executive order 104.50 enacted
by President Eisenhower in 1953
prohibited gays from holding federal
government positions and established
security criteria for federal employment
as a direct result of these policies
hundreds of openly gay State Department
employees were outed and fired about 5
000 gay individuals including private
contractors and military personnel lost
their jobs at the federal government as
a result of this presidential order the
victims were not only fired from
employment
but also outed to the public this
presidential order expanded Truman's
loyalty program by including sexual
perversion among the actions that
disqualified a person from holding a
federal post many new rules and
practices were implemented to identify
and expel persons who identify as
homosexual lesbian or bisexual it was
common practice to conduct interviews
and check for overt displays of
homosexual biases as part of these new
methods to detect gaze people were
judged guilty not just by connection
with those who frequented the same
homosexual clubs as the suspects they
may also be questioned if members of
their immediate or extended family had
gay Tendencies or gay connections by the
mid-1950s similar repressive and
oppressive policies had been enacted in
States and local governments as well
expanding bans on hiring lesbians and
gay men to cover 12 million workers more
than 20 percent of the United States
labor force all of whom were required to
sign Oaths attesting to their moral
Purity in order to obtain or maintain
employment but McCarthy's crew of
homophobes were about to have the sites
trained on themselves when Roy Cohn
brought on G David shine as Chief
consultant to the McCarthy staff
speculation arose that shine and Cohn
had a sexual relationship during the
Army McCarthy hearings Cohn denied being
closer than an ordinary friend to shine
or having any special interest in him
Army Council Joseph Welch seemed to
elude to cohn's sexual orientation
throughout the proceedings did you think
this came from a big
Define
you might be an expert on that yeah yeah
I should say
I should say Mr Senator that a pixie is
a close relative of a fairy McCarthy's
unwavering support for cone fueled
rumors that the senator was either
coerced by his senior counsel or that
their relationship went beyond
professional boundaries McCarthy often
engaged in homosexual activities Nevada
publisher Hank Greenspun said in 1952
and claimed that he was a regular at the
White Horse Inn
a Milwaukee gay nightclub all this
attention eventually led to Roy Cohn
being removed from his post alongside
McCarthy and helped fuel McCarthy's own
downfall in due time the McCarthy period
as a whole came to an end in the middle
of the 1950s when Nicole V young
judgment in 1956 significantly reduced
the authority to remove anyone from the
federal government with discriminatory
grounds however the lavender scare
continued for many more decades the
Florida legislative investigative
committee also known as the Johns
committee or flick was another
manifestation of the lavender scare that
endured established in 1956 the flick
lasted until 1964 before being dissolved
the committee's mission in Florida was
to investigate and fire homosexual
Public School teachers carrying on the
lavender scare and spirit if not
entirely in practice and it wasn't until
the Obama Administration that military
service for openly gay people was
allowed since the don't ask don't tell
policy was just another executive order
104.50 under a different name but though
the lavender scare unofficially came to
an end with the fall of McCarthyism
after multiple Decisions by the Supreme
Court defanged the senator and left him
nothing but a paper tiger The Fear and
Loathing toward homosexuals as well as
accused Communists survived much longer
in Hollywood even before McCarthy began
his Crusade producers in California had
been blacklisting anyone even remotely
connected to Communism thanks to
pressure from future president of the
United States Ronald Reagan who was then
the president of the Screen Actors Guild
many Hollywood professionals were called
to appear before the house on American
Activities Committee in October of 1947.
it was announced that the committee
would look into allegations that
communist spies and supporters had
planted propaganda in Hollywood movies
Walt Disney spoke first during the
proceedings Disney testified that
Communists posed a severe danger to the
film business and identified many former
employees as possible Communists in
contrast other leading Hollywood figures
including director John Houston and
actors Humphrey Bogart Lauren Bacall
Judy Garland and Danny Kaye organized
the committee for the First Amendment to
protest the government's targeting of
the film industry of the people working
in Hollywood that the house on American
Activities Committee was interested in
many were accused of being members of
the communist Party USA of the initial
witness list of 43 19 declared that they
would not give evidence 11 of the
original 19 were questioned by the panel
on Monday October 27th the hearings last
phase began and members of the committee
for the First Amendment traveled in from
throughout the country
to participate only one of the 11
unfriendly Witnesses writer Bertolt
Breck agreed to speak with the committee
after which he fled the country ten
others declined claiming their right to
free expression and assembly under the
First Amendment the question are you now
or have you ever been a member of the
Communist party was one which they flat
out refused to answer the committee
formally accused these ten of contempt
of congress and began criminal
proceedings against them in the Full
House of Representatives the house on
American Activities Committee hearings
failed to turn up any evidence that
Hollywood was secretly disseminating
communist propaganda but the industry
was nonetheless transformed producers
and Studio heads were now on the watch
for any and all anti-American activity
fearing further investigation from the
government especially ones that might
lead to government censorship which
they'd only narrowly avoided decades
before so as Hollywood always does they
chose to self-censor before being told
to this began a Crackdown on any
directors writers or actors who might be
communist or gay The Echoes of
McCarthyism were sounding loudly in the
Hollywood Hills and the association
between gay and communist were
inseparable by then and as mentioned in
previous episodes Hollywood was more or
less stuffed full of gay men and women
working in any one of a multitude of
roles in the industry this resulted in
multiple well-respected directors moving
to Europe and sending many more
up-and-coming and well-established
actors even further into the closet
suddenly films about the fear of
extraterrestrials became hot tickets in
Hollywood as a narrative device to help
instill fear of anything even slightly
different to the masses of the growing
Suburban America these monsters from
outer space were Communists gays and
people of color these aliens could be
anything and everything John and Martha
were afraid of which thanks to Senator
McCarthy
was a lot of things but no theme was
more prevalent than the alien
shapeshifter the ones who could live
alongside the normal people corrupting
them from within Communists coming for
your husbands gays coming for your sons
the Red Scare and the dread of communist
infiltration into American culture are
commonly seen as metaphors in the 1956
science fiction classic Invasion of the
Body Snatchers the film has also been
seen as a homosexual allegory by any
number of reviewers and Scholars
throughout the years the film's
narrative revolves around an
extraterrestrial invasion of Earth and
the subsequent infiltration of soulless
carbon copy humans developed in pods the
Pod inhabitants begin to symbolize as
the film unfolds a society that is
driven by uniformity and tries to
eliminate individuality and uniqueness
this uniformity and Conformity theme has
been linked to the gay experience in the
1950s ever since
many gay individuals in the past were
pressured to conceal their identities
and mask their sexual orientation
because of the widespread stigma
associated with being gay at the time
the film's depiction of the pod people
paints them as robotic drones devoid a
feeling and individuality in addition
the film's characters are a misfit crew
that the perceived conventional Society
Rejects and ignores people who insist
that something nefarious is occurring
are sometimes branded as insane or
paranoid similar to the experiences of
gay people who were frequently
disregarded and mocked by the larger
society the characters in this story are
members of a minority group who are
trying to persuade the world of a threat
that only they can see Invasion of the
Body Snatchers is undoubtedly a film
that reflects the societal anxieties of
its time and can also be seen as a
powerful gay allegory by exploring
themes of Conformity individuality and
marginalization the film speaks to the
experiences of many gay people who
struggle to find Acceptance in a society
that sought to erase their differences
Invaders from Mars features a similar
plot to Invasion of the Body Snatchers
David the film's protagonist is a
creative and sensitive young man who is
ridiculed and excluded from school he
has a difficult time relating to people
even his own father with whom he has a
tense relationship many members of the
queer Community especially around the
time the film was released have
experienced feelings of alienation and
exclusion similar to those shown in the
film actor Arthur Franz who plays
David's father in the film has been
speculated to be homosexual in real life
Morris ankrum who was also thought to be
gay plays Dr kelston an investigator of
the UFO phenomena there are aspects in
Invaders from Mars that may be seen via
a queer lens even if that wasn't the
film's original intent from the
underlying ties between the male
characters to the overt themes of
possession and Invasion the 1939 film
nanochka has also been interpreted by
film critics as an allegory for lesbian
desire and love firstly the character of
Nina played by Greta Garbo is a Stern
and serious Soviet Envoy who comes to
Paris to supervise a group of three
bumbling comrades who have been sent
there to sell Jewels seized during the
Russian Revolution Nina is initially
portrayed as cold and unfeeling but she
begins to thaw as she falls in love with
the Charming and carefree count Leon
dalgol played by Melvin Douglas this
Dynamic of a strict and buttoned up
woman being seduced by a more carefree
and flamboyant man is a common Trope in
Classic Hollywood films but it also
mirrors the expectation that more manly
or serious women would lighten up and go
straight eventually the Assumption among
many was after all that the only thing
stopping a lesbian from being a happy
Homemaker was finding the right man
finally there is the character of Irma
played by Bella Lugosi Irma is portrayed
as a flamboyant and Theatrical figure
with a campy and exaggerated manner of
speaking and gesturing while the
character is not explicitly identified
as queer the fact that Lugosi himself
was bisexual and often played roles with
homoerotic undertones has led some
viewers to interpret Irma as a coded
representation of queer desire and from
a completely opposite direction we have
the notorious Plan 9 from Outer Space
from the infamous filmmaker Ed Wood
while the film has long been considered
a cinematic disaster it has also been
celebrated for its campy subversive
qualities in particular many critics and
Scholars have interpreted the film as a
queer allegory one way in which the film
can be seen as a queer allegory is
through the character of the alien
leader Eros Eros is portrayed as a
flamboyant effeminate figure with his
distinctive attire makeup and mannerisms
he moves with a graceful almost poetic
quality and his speech is melodramatic
and Theatrical his characterization is
so exaggerated that it goes well beyond
mere stereotyping and instead creates a
queer icon that challenges and subverts
traditional gender Norms another aspect
of the film that can be interpreted as a
queer allegory is its underlying
critique of Conformity the plot revolves
around the alien's plan to destroy Earth
because they view it as a threat to
their own culture and way of life this
can be seen as a commentary on the
obsessive forces of Conformity that
queer individuals have often faced the
aliens desire for uniformity and
sameness can be read as a metaphor for
the societal pressures to conform to
heteronormative standards and
expectations and even the internal
expectations of the queer Community
finally the film's low budget campy
style can be seen as a celebration of
the marginal and the underground
in the context of queer culture Camp has
often been used as a way to resist and
subvert dominant cultural norms the
film's deliberately bad acting special
effects and overall production value can
be seen as a queer refusal to conform to
traditional Hollywood standards or maybe
I'm reaching a bit with that one but
suffice to say the 1950s were a time of
strict social conformity in America the
culture was dominated by the ideal of
the nuclear family where a husband
worked and provided for his wife and
children while the wife stayed at home
and took care of the household any
deviation from this Norm was considered
dangerously deviant and subject to
social ostracization this of course
included homosexuality which was widely
seen as a mental illness or a moral
failing gay people in the 1950s faced
significant depression from the dominant
culture as well as legal and social
sanctions homosexuality was illegal in
every state and those who were caught
engaging in same-sex activities could
face imprisonment or
institutionalization in mental hospitals
in this culture of fear and secrecy gay
people were forced to hide their true
selves and Lead double lives whereas
suspected communist agents chose to lead
double lives many gay men and women were
also forced into marriages with the
opposite sex in order to maintain
appearances and avoid suspicion these
marriages were often unhappy and
unfulfilling for both partners and they
often ended in divorce or estrangement
this further reinforced the idea that
homosexuality was a choice and that gay
people could choose to be straight if
they wanted to gays and lesbians were
also subject to violence and
discrimination in many areas gay bars
were the only places where they could
meet and socialize however these spaces
were often raided by police who would
arrest patrons and subject them to
violence and humiliation These Bars were
actually rated more often than suspected
communist hideouts gays and lesbians
were considered easier targets by the
police and since the government believed
a queer person could easily be turned
communist arresting them was killing two
birds with one stone the policing of
gender norms and the emphasis on
Conformity made it nearly impossible for
gays and lesbians to be themselves and
live fulfilling lives it wasn't until
the Stonewall riots of 1969 and the
subsequent gay rights movement that
things began to change in America but
Hollywood would begin to ease up on the
depiction of gay people in the 1960s
but mostly in coded ways but even with
deep deep coding
there was a catch
anyone confirmed to be gay or even
heavily coded to be
wouldn't have it easy and to live a life
true to themselves
they might just have to die for it
[Music]
as we close out this episode I'd really
like to thank all of our patrons
it's only because of you that videos
like this are even possible
YouTube isn't all too friendly when it
comes to pushing lgbtq content in fact
in most cases they try their best to
keep it hidden so our amazing patrons
are the only reason this channel keeps
chugging along
thank you all so much
from the bottom of my heart thank you
um
if you'd like to become a part of this
seriously amazing Community you can do
so for as little as a dollar a month at
the link in the pinned comment
alright now I'll let their credits roll
and I'll see you soon for unrequited
episode 4
dying to be queer
[Music]
foreign
thank you
[Music]
foreign